# **Input / Output In Java**

Before discussing how to take input in java, let’s first understand how to print a statement in java.&nbsp;

<strong>1. Using println() method: </strong>In java, we usually use println() method to print the text on the console. The text is passed as the parameter to this method in the form of string. This method prints the text on the console, and after printing the text, the cursor remains at the start of the next line at the console. The next printing takes place from the next line.

**Example:**

    System.out.println("Shubham");
    System.out.println("Choudhury");

**Output:**
    
    Shubham
    Choudhury

<strong>2. Using print() method: </strong>In java, we usually use print() method to print the text on the console. The text is passed as the parameter to this method in the form of string. This method prints the text on the console, and after printing the text, the cursor remains at the end of the text at the console. The next printing takes place from just here.

**Example:**

    System.out.print("Shubham");
    System.out.print("Choudhury");

**Output:**
    
    ShubhamChoudhury

<strong>3. Using printf() method: </strong>The printf() method in java is used to print formatted data on the console. The print() and println() method take single arguments, but printf() method may take multiple arguments.

**Example:**

    System.out.printf("Formatted with precision: PI = %.2f\n", Mathe.PI);


    // Automatically appends zeros to the
    // rightmost part of the decimal
    float n = 5.2f;
    System.out.printf("Formatted to specific width: n = %.4f\n", n);

**Output:**
        
        Formatted with precision: PI = 3.14
        Formatted to specific width: n = 5.2000

**Example:**

    public class Test {

        public static void main(String[] args){

            int age = 21;
            String firstName = "Shubham";
            String lastName = "Choudhury";

            System.out.printf("My name is %s %s and I am %d years old.", firstName, lastName, age);
        }
    }

**Output:**
        
        My name is Shubham Choudhury and I am 21 years old.