# **Taking input in java**

In Java, there are mainly two ways to get the input from the user

- Using Scanner class
- Using BufferedReader class

<strong>1. Using Scanner class: </strong> Scanner is a class in java that is used to take input from the user. It is present in the java.util package. Scanner class is one of the most preferable ways to take input from the user. This class is used to read the input of primitive types such as int, double, long, etc. and String. You need to import the java.util package before using the Scanner class.

## **Methods of Scanner class in Java:**

Java Scanner class provides various methods to read different primitive data types from the user.

Method        | Description
--------------|----------------------------------
nextInt()     | reads an int value from the user.
nextFloat()   | reads a float value from the user.
nextDouble()  | reads a double value from the user.
nextLong()    | reads a long value from the user.
nextShort()   | reads a short value from the user.
nextByte()    | reads a byte value from the user.
nextBoolean() | reads a boolean value from the user.
nextLine()    | reads a line of text from the user.
next()        | reads a word from the user.

**Example 1:** Taking int value from the user

    import java.util.Scanner;
    class TakingInputFromUser {
        public static void main(String argo[]) {

            // Creating an object of Scanner class
            Scanner sc = new Scanner(System.in);

            // Read integer value from the user
            System.out.println(“Enter first number :”);
            int a = sc.nextInt();

            System.out.println(“Enter second number :”);
            int b = sc.nextInt();

            // Adding two values
            int c = a + b;

            // Printing the sum
            System.out.println(“Sum is : “ +c);
        }
    }

**Output:**
    
        Enter first number :
        10
        Enter second number :
        20
        Sum is : 30

**Example 2:** Taking String from the user

    import.java.util.Scanner;
    class TakingInputFromUser {
        public static void main(String arg[]) {

            Scanner sc = new Scanner(System.in);
            System.out.println(“Enter a String : “);

            // Read a string from the user
            String str = sc.nextLine();
            System.out.println(“Your entered string is : “ + str);
        }
    }

**Output:**
    
        Enter a String :
        Shubham Choudhury
        Your entered string is : Shubham Choudhury