# **Interview Questions**

## **1. What is a static keyword in Java?**

Static is a Non-Access Modifier. Static can be applied to variable, method, nested class, and initialization blocks (static block).

## **2. Why main() method is declared as static?**

If our main() method is not declared as static then the JVM has to create an object first and call which causes the problem of having extra memory allocation.

## **3. Can constructors be static in Java?**

In general, a static method means that “The Method belongs to the class and not to any particular object” but a constructor is always invoked with respect to an object, so it makes no sense for a constructor to be static.

## **4. Can we use this to refer static members?**

Yes, it's possible to access the static variables of a class using this but it's discouraged and as per best practices this should be used on nonstatic reference.

## **5. What are all the differences between this and the super keyword?**

- This refers to the current class object whereas super refers to the superclass object
- Using this we can access all non-static methods and variables. Using super we can access superclass variables and methods from sub-class.
- Using this(); call we can call other constructors in the same class. Using super we can call superclass constructor from sub-class constructor.

## **6. What is a final method?**

When a method is declared as final, then it is called a final method, The subclass can call the final method of the parent class but cannot override it.

## **7. Can a main() method be declared final?**

Yes, the main() method can be declared as final and cannot be overridden.

## **8. What is a Static Final variable in Java?**

When have declared a variable as static final then the variable becomes a CONSTANT. Only one copy of the variable exists which cannot be changed by any instance.