# **Introduction and Declaration of Variables**

## **Introduction to Variables**

A **Variable** is a name given to a memory location. It is used to store a value that may vary. Java is a statically typed language, and hence, all the variables are declared before use.

## **Variable Declaration**

In Java, we can declare variables as follows:

- **type:** Type of the data that can be stored in this variable. It can be int, float,
double, etc.

- **name:** Name given to the variable.

        data_type variable_name;

        Example: int x;

In this way, we can only create a variable in the memory location. Currently, it doesn’t have any value. We can assign the value in this variable by using two ways:

- By using variable initialization.
- By taking input

Here, we have discussed only the first way, i.e. variable initialization. We will discuss the second way later.

    data_type variable_name = value;

    Example: int x = 10;


# **Variables naming Convention in Java**

<ul>
    <li>A variable name should be short and meaningful.</li>
    <li>It should begin with a lowercase letter.</li>
    <li>It can begin with special characters such as _ (underscore) and $ (dollar) sign.</li>
    <li>If the variable name contains multiple words, then use the camel case, i.e. variable name should start with a lowercase letter followed by an uppercase letter. For eg: codingNinja, camelCase.</li>
    <li>Always try to avoid single character variable names such as i, j, and k except for the temporary variables.</li>
    <li>A variable name can not contain whitespaces.</li>
    <li>We can’t use keywords(pre-defined literals) as the variable names.</li>
</ul>