# **TypeCasting in Java**

TypeCasting in Java is the process of converting one primitive data type into another. TypeCasting can be done automatically and explicitly. 

When we assign the value of one data type to another data type, then there is a chance that two data types might not be compatible with each other. The Java compiler will automatically perform the conversion if the data types are consistent. This type of conversion is known as Automatic Type Conversion. If the java compiler cannot perform the conversion automatically, they need to be cast explicitly. 

There are two types of TypeCasting in Java.

<ul>
    <li>Widening or Automatic Type Conversion.</li>
    <li>Narrowing or Explicit Type Conversion.</li>
</ul>


<strong>1. Widening or Automatic Type Conversion: </strong>When we assign a value of a smaller data type to a large data type, this process is known as Widening Type Casting. It is also known as Automatic Type Conversion because the Java compiler will perform the conversion automatically. This can happen only when the two data types are compatible.&nbsp;

    byte -> short -> int -> long -> float -> double (Widening or Automatic Type Conversion)

For example, In Java, int data types are compatible, but it isn't compatible with char and boolean data types. Also, char and boolean data types are not compatible with each other.

**Example:**

    public class WideningConversion {
        public static void main(String args[]) {

            // Automatic Type Conversion
            int i = 2147483647; // Int max value in java
            long l = i; // Widening or Automatic Type Conversion
            l = l + 1;
            double d = l;  // Widening or Automatic Type Conversion
            System.out.println("Int value " + i);
            System.out.println("Long value " + l);
            System.out.println("Double value " + d);
        }
    }

**Output:**
    
        Int value 2147483647
        Long value 2147483648
        Double value 2.147483648E9

<br>
<strong>2. Narrowing or Explicit Type Conversion: </strong>When we assign a value of a large data type to a small data type, the process is known as Narrowing Type Casting. This can’t be done automatically. We need to convert the type explicitly. If we don’t perform casting, the java compiler will give a compile-time error.&nbsp;

    double -> float -> long -> int -> short -> byte (Narrowing or Explicit Type Conversion)

**Example:**

    public class ExplicitConversion {
        public static void main(String args[]) {

            // Explicit Type Conversion
            double d = 100.04;
            long l = (long) d; // Explicit Type Conversion
            int i = (int) l; // Explicit Type Conversion
            System.out.println("Double value " + d);
            System.out.println("Long value " + l);
            System.out.println("Int value " + i);
        }
    }

**Output:**

        Double value 100.04
        Long value 100
        Int value 100