# **Control Statements in Java**

A Control Statement is used to control the flow of the execution of a program. In the Java programming language, we can control the flow of execution of a program based on some conditions. In Java, we can put control statements in the following three categories. These are selection statements, iteration statements, and jump statements.&nbsp;

## **Selection Statements**

<strong>&nbsp;</strong>The selection statements in java allow your program to choose a different&nbsp;path of execution based on certain conditions. Java selection statements provide different types of selection statements such as:

<strong>i) if statement: </strong>The if statement in Java is a decision-making statement that determines whether or not a certain statement or block of statements will be executed. The block of statements is executed if a certain condition evaluates to true; otherwise, it is not.

**Syntax:**

    if(condition) {
        // code to be executed if the
        // condition is true
    }

**Example:**

    public class JavaIfStatement {
        public ststic void main(String args[]) {
            int a = 10;

            // If the condition is true, then only
            // this block of statement is executed.
            if(a < 20){
                System.out.println("If block is executed");
            }
        }
    }

**Output:**

    If block is executed

<strong>ii) if-else statement:&nbsp;</strong>Java if statement is used to decide whether a certain statement or block of statements will be executed or not. If a certain condition is true, then the block of statements is executed, otherwise not. But if you want to do something else if your condition is false, then you should use else statements. One can use an else statement with if statement to execute the block of statements when the condition is false.

**Syntax:**

    if(condition){
        // execute this block if the
        // condition is true
    }
    else{
        // execute this block if the
        // condition is false
    }

**Example:**

    public class JavaIfElseExample {
        public static void main(String args[]){
            int a = 49;

            // Check the condition, if the condition
            // is true then if block is executed
            // otherwise else block is executed
            if(a % 2 == 0){
                System.out.println("Even Number");
            }
            else{
                System.out.println("Number is Odd");
            }
        }
    }

**Output:**

    Number is Odd

<strong>iii) if-else-if ladder: </strong>When we need to deal with different conditions in Java, we use the if-else-if ladder. From the top-down, the if sentences are executed. The assumption connected with that it is executed as soon as one of the conditions governing the if is true, and the remainder of the ladder is bypassed. The final else sentence will be executed if none of the conditions are valid. The final else sentence serves as a default condition, meaning that it is executed if all other conditional checks fail. There will be no steps taken if there is no final else and all other circumstances are incorrect.<br><br>&nbsp;

**Syntax:**

    if(condition1){
        // if condition1 is true, this part of the code will be executed
    }
    else if(condition2){
        // if condition2 is true, this part of the code will be executed
    }
    else if(condition3){
        // if condition3 is true, this part of the code will be executed
    }
    ....
    else{
        // If all the above conditions are false, this part of the code will be executed
    }

**Example:**

    public class JavaIfElseIfLadder {
        public ststic void main(String args[]){
            int a = 50;

            // if-else-if ladder, checking the
            // multiple conditions
            if(a == 30){
                System.out.println("a is 30");
            }
            else if(a == 45){
                System.out.println("a is 45");
            }
            else if(a == 50){
                System.out.println("a is 50");
            }
            else{
                System.out.println("a is not present");
            }
        }
    }

**Output:**

    a is 50

<strong>iv) Switch Statement: </strong>A multiway branch statement in Java is the switch statement. It can be used to run a single statement based on a set of conditions. It will deal with data types such as byte, short, char, and int. The value of the expression is compared to one of the literal values in the case statement in the Java switch statement. If there is a match, the code sequence that follows the case statement is executed. The default statement is used if none of the constants fit the value of the expression. It's not necessary to use the default sentence. The declaration sequence is terminated with the split statement within the turn event.

**Syntax:**

    switch(expression){
        case constant1:
            // code to be executed
            // If expression is equal to constant1
            break;
        casr constant2:
            // code to be executed
            // If expression is equal to constant2
            break;
            ...
        default:
            // code to be executed
            // If the expression doesn't match any constant
    }

**Example:**

    public class JavaSwitchStatement {
        public static void main(String args[]){

            int i = 5;

            // switch exepression
            switch(i){

                // case statements
                case 0:
                    System.out.println("i is zero");
                    break;
                case 1:
                    System.out.println("i is one");
                    break;
                case 2:
                    System.out.println("i is two");
                    break;
                
                // Default case statement
                default:
                    System.out.println("i is greater than two");
            }
        }
    }

**Output:**

    i is greater than two