# **Jump Statements**

In Java, we use jump statements to transfer the control of the program to other parts of the program. There are various types of jump statements in java.

<strong>i) break statement:</strong> The loops are terminated using the Java break expression. It can be used within a loop. When a break statement is found within a loop, the loop is ended and control is passed to the next statement after the loop. There are three uses for the Java break statement.

<ul>
    <li>It can be used to terminate a statement sequence in the switch statement.</li>
    <li>It can be used to terminate a loop.</li>
    <li>It can be used as a civilized form of goto statement for performing a labeled break.</li>
</ul>

<strong>Syntax:</strong>

    break;

<strong>Example:</strong>
    
    public class JavaBreakStatement {
        public static void main(String arg[]) {

            // terminate the loop if i is 5
            for (int i = 1; i < = 10; i++) {
                if (i == 5) {
                    break;
                }
                System.out.print(i + " ");
            }
        }
    }

<strong>Output:</strong>
    
    1 2 3 4

<br><strong>ii) labeled break statement: </strong>Java labeled break statement can be used as a civilized form of a goto statement. Java doesn’t provide a goto statement. It utilizes a label, which is a code block that must enclose the break statement but does not have to do so immediately. To exit a series of nested blocks, we can use labeled break statements.

<strong>Example:</strong>
    
    public class JavaLabeledBreakStatement {
        public static void main(String arg[]) {
            boolean b = true;
            // first label
            first: {
                // second label
                second: {
                    // third label
                    third: {
                        System.out.println("Before the break statement");
                        if (b) {
                            break second;
                        }
                        System.out.println("This won't execute");
                    }
                    System.out.println("This won't execute");
                }
                System.out.println("This is after second block");
            }
        }
    }

<strong>Output:</strong>
        
    Before the break statement
    This is after second block


<strong>iii) continue statement:</strong> Java continue statement is used to skip the current iteration of the loop. We can use continue statements in all types of loops. In the case of for loop, the continue statement forces the control to jump immediately to the update statement. In case of while and do-while loop the control immediately jumps to the boolean expression.<br>&nbsp;

<strong>Syntax:</strong>

    continue;

<strong>Example:</strong>
    
    public class JavaContinueStatement {
        public static void main(String arg[]) {

            // skip the value of 5
            for (int i = 1; i < = 10; i++) {
                if (i == 5) {
                    continue;
                }
                System.out.print(i + " ");
            }
        }
    }

<strong>Output:</strong>
        
    1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 10

<strong>iv) return statement:</strong> Java return statement is used to explicitly return from the method. It transfers the program control back to the caller method. The return statement immediately terminates the method in which it is executed. We need to declare a method return type in its method declaration. Any method declared void doesn’t return any value. A compile-time error can occur if you attempt to return a value from a method that is declared void.

<strong>Syntax:</strong>

    return;

<strong>Example:</strong>
        
        public class JavaReturnStatement {
            public static void main(String arg[]) {
                int result = sum(10, 20);
                System.out.println("The sum is: " + result);
            }
    
            public static int sum(int a, int b) {
                int sum = a + b;
                return sum;
            }
        }

<strong>Output:</strong>
            
    The sum is: 30