<center><h1><b>Introduction and Editions of Java</b><h1></center>

## **Introduction**

Java is an object-oriented, class-based, secured, platform-independent, and
general-purpose programming language. Java was originally developed by James Gosling at
Sun Microsystems and released in 1995 as a core component of Sun Microsystem’s Java
platform. Java programming language is based on the write once, run anywhere (WORA)
principle, meaning that compiled Java code can run on all platforms that support Java
without the need for recompilation. Java applications are typically compiled to bytecode that
can run on any Java Virtual Machine (JVM) regardless of the underlying operating system

## **Different Editions of Java**

There are four editions of the Java programming language.

- Java Platform, Standard Edition (Java SE)
- Java Platform, Enterprise Edition (Java EE)
- Java Platform, Micro Edition (Java ME)
- JavaFX

<ol>
    <li>
        <b>Java SE: </b>Java SE, also known as Core Java, is the most basic and standard version
of java. It consists of a wide variety of general-purpose APIs (like java.lang, java.util)
as well as many special-purpose APIs. Java SE is used to create Desktop
applications. It defines everything from the basic types and objects of java
programming language to high-level classes that are used for networking, security,
database access, graphical user interface development (GUI), and XML parsing.
    </li>
    <br>
    <li>
        <b>Java EE: </b>The Java EE platform is built on top of the Java SE platform. The
Enterprise Edition version of java has a much larger usage of Java, like the
development of web services, networking, server-side scripting, and other various
web-based applications. Java EE uses HTML, CSS, JavaScript, etc., so as to create
web pages and web services. It is also one of the most widely used web
development standards.
    </li>
    <br>
    <li>
        <b>Java ME: </b>The Java ME platform is widely used for developing embedded systems,
mobiles, and small devices. Java ME uses many libraries and APIs of Java SE, as
well as many of its own. The basic aim of this edition is to work on mobiles, wireless
devices, set top boxes, etc. Most of the apps developed for the phones were built on
Java ME only.
    </li>
    <br>
    <li>
        <b>JavaFX: </b>JavaFX is another edition of java technology, which is now merged with
Java SE 8. It is mainly used to create rich GUI (Graphical User Interface) in java
apps. It is supported by both desktop environments as well as web browsers.
    </li>
</ol>

<br>
<br>

<center><h1><b>Features and Uses of Java</b><h1></center>

## **Features of Java**

The features of the Java programming language are given below.

<ol>
    <li>
        <strong>Simple: </strong>Java programming language is easy to learn and its syntax is simple and easy to understand. According to Sun Microsystem, the java programming language is simple because the java syntax is similar to C++. So, it is easier for the programmer to learn java after C++.&nbsp; Java has removed many rarely-used features like explicit pointers, operator overloading, etc. In java, there is no need to remove unused objects because there is an automatic garbage collection in java.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Object-Oriented: </strong>Java is an object-oriented programming language. Everything in java is an object. We can use the functionality of our program by using objects. Object-oriented programming language simplifies software development and maintenance by providing some rules. The basic concepts of OOPs are classes and objects, packages, polymorphism, inheritance, abstraction, encapsulation, and etc.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Platform independent: </strong>Java is a platform-independent programming language. We can write java code once and run it anywhere. Java code can be run on multiple platforms, for example, Windows, Linux, Mac, etc. Java code is compiled by the compiler and converted into byte code. This byte code is platform-independent code because it can be run on multiple platforms.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Robust: </strong>Java programming language is robust because it uses strong memory management. There is an automatic garbage collection in java to destroy the objects which are unused. Exception handling is another feature that makes java programming robust.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Portable: </strong>Java programming language is portable because it enables you to carry byte code to any platform.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Multithreaded: </strong>Java also supports multithreaded programming. We can create multiple threads in java. The main advantage of multithreading is that it doesn’t occupy the memory for each thread. It shares a common memory area. Threads are important for web applications, multimedia applications, etc.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Distributed:</strong> Java programming language is distributed because it facilitates the user to create distributed applications. We can create distributed applications in java by using RMI and EJB.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Secure: </strong>When a java program is compiled, it generates a byte code that is in the non-readable form. The java byte code cannot be read by humans. That makes the java language secure.
    </li>
</ol>


## **Uses of Java**

Java is the most popular, widely used object-oriented programming language. By using java, we can develop a variety of applications such as web applications, mobile applications, desktop applications, network applications, and many more.&nbsp;Java is used for developing different applications. Some of them are listed below:

<ol>
    <li>
        <strong>Banking: </strong>In banking, the Java programming language is used to develop transaction management.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Mobile App Development: </strong>Java can be used to develop mobile applications. Most of the android applications are built using java. So, if you are familiar with java, it will become much easier to develop mobile applications.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Desktop Applications:</strong> We can also create GUI applications in java. Java provides AWT, Swings, and JavaFX to develop desktop applications.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Big Data:</strong> In Big Data, the Hadoop MapReduce framework is written using java.<br>&nbsp;
    </li>
    <li>
        <strong>Web applications: </strong>We can also create web applications using java. The most popular frameworks like Spring, Spring Boot, Hibernate used for developing web applications are based on java.
    </li>
</ol>